---
date: 2020-09-30
excerpt: "Tool to aid decision-making regarding travel during pandemics"
header: ~
tags:
  - COVID-19
  - travel
  - visualization
title: "SafeT"
youtubeId: watch?v=lyuuoWin1so
---

*Project submitted as a university coursework requirement and prepared by team of six students.*

COVID-19 is one of the most contagious flu-like diseases the world has seen in a century. Its spread is linked with mobility in the regions where the disease is active. As a result, many countries issued ‘Stay at Home’ orders and restrictions including suspension of international flights, enforcement of full or partial lock downs, closure of businesses, order of curfews and limitations on public gatherings. 

United Nations body World Tourism Organization reported on September 10, 2020 that ‘more than 50% of global destinations are easing travel restrictions - but caution remains’. Due to personal and business needs, travel is sometimes necessary even in the face of a global pandemic. In such a scenario, lack of information about travel restrictions and safety can leave one perplexed and expose them to serious risks associated with COVID. This calls for a platform that can help one understand the possibility and requirements of travel from an origin to their destination country, and also the mobility and health services available in these locations. 

[SafeT] (https://public.tableau.com/profile/saumya.sinha1550#!/vizhome/SafeT/Overview) presents a simplified one-stop view of travel restrictions, safety recommendations and any other travel and stay related official information that will benefit travellers and travel operators. Find out more about what SafeT offers through the video below.

{% include youtubePlayer.html id=page.youtubeId %}

Data was collected from a number of sources as credited in the ‘Data Sources’ section below and pre-processed. The pre-processing steps include -
1.	Removal of redundant columns
2.	Treatment of missing values
3.	Treatment of whitespaces and obvious errors
4.	Renaming columns
5.	Rolling up data to nation level
6.	Ranking countries based on safety assessment score
7.	Joining 6 datasets on nation

The pre-processed data was then loaded to Tableau. Here, derived metrics were calculated from base metrics and visualisations spread over three tabs were created. The key features of the visualisation are listed below.
1.	Overview tab featured an interactive map and dropdowns to select origin and destination of intended travel. Further, it highlighted the most important travel and pandemic related information.
2.	Mobility & Restrictions tab offered information related to international travel, public policy health measure indices, status of restrictions and mobility trends since the start of the pandemic in selected regions.
3.	Other Factors & Advice tab summarised the latest healthcare and economic landscape of the selected regions and government issued detailed international and local travel restrictions.

As SafeT informs its users about pandemic related safety measures and mobility restrictions in an effort towards making their travel safe and their stay comfortable, it carries the responsibility of providing high quality up-to-date information to users. We have, therefore, sourced information from open data sources released by trusted organizations. 

**Data Sources**
Necessary data was collected from 7 reliable sources: Our World in Data [1], Deep Knowledge Group [2], Google [3], Oxford University [4], ACAPS [5], the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (University of Washington) [6] and United Nations World Food Programme [7]. 

[1] "owid/covid-19-data", GitHub, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/owid/covid-19- data/tree/master/public/data . [Accessed: 17- Oct- 2020].  
[2] "COVID-19 Regional Safety Assessment 250 Countries, Regions & Territories", DEEP KNOWLEDGE GROUP, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.dkv.global/covid-safety- assessment-250-list . [Accessed: 17- Oct- 2020].  
[3] "COVID-19 Community Mobility Report", COVID-19 Community Mobility Report, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility /. [Accessed: 17- Oct- 2020].  
[4] "OxCGRT/covid-policy-tracker", GitHub, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/OxCGRT/covid-policy-tracker . [Accessed: 17- Oct- 2020].  
[5] "COVID-19 Government Measures Dataset - Humanitarian Data Exchange", Data.humdata.org, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://data.humdata.org/dataset/acaps-covid19-government-measures- dataset . [Accessed: 17- Oct- 2020].  
[6] "COVID-19 estimate downloads", Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.healthdata.org/covid/data-downloads . [Accessed: 17- Oct- 2020].  
[7] "COVID-19 Global Travel Restrictions and Airline Information - Humanitarian Data Exchange", Data.humdata.org, 2020. [Online].   Available: https://data.humdata.org/dataset/f5c456e9-88bb- 4cb8-9e8d-b77fb634705e . [Accessed: 17- Oct- 2020].